
Dear Mr. Frucht:

        Thank you for letting me know of your support for efforts to close
the School of the Americas (SOA) in Fort Benning, Georgia.  I appreciate
hearing from you on this important issue.

        As you may know, I have been a strong opponent of funding for the
School of the Americas and have voted repeatedly to close it.  This year, I
am an original co-sponsor of H.R. 732, sponsored by Representative Joseph
Moakley, which would close the School.  In addition, I supported an
amendment to the Fiscal Year 2000 Foreign Operations Appropriations Act that
cut off funding for the School.  I am pleased to report that this amendment
was approved by a vote of 230 to 197.  Although this provision was not
included in the final version of the bill, it represents an important step
forward in opposition to the SOA.

        Passage of this amendment sends a strong signal to the Defense
Department that the School's days are numbered.  It reflects the strong
grassroots efforts by church groups, human rights organizations and other
advocates who have been speaking out against the egregious  activities
associated with the School.  Cutting off funds to the School of the Americas
is an important step forward in forging a new relationship with Latin
America militaries based first and foremost on adherence to civilian
authority and respect for human rights.

        Thank you for sharing your views with me.  Whenever you seek
additional information on this or any other issue, please do not hesitate to
contact me.  I also encourage you to visit my homepage on the Internet at
http://www.house.gov/gejdenson or contact me via e-mail at
bozrah@mail.house.gov.

Sincerely,
Sam Gejdenson
